[Beta] Python models (#1754)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/building-a-dbt-project/building-models/python-models.md

---
title: "Python models"
---

:::info Beta

> This feature is arriving in dbt Core v1.3, which is currently in beta. We encourage you to:

Reviewer: is it worth highlighting that it's not available in cloud yet (unless I'm missing something)?

Reviewer 2: Is it also worth making a callout that they're only available in BQ, Snowflake, and Databricks earlier here?

Author: > is it worth highlighting that it's not available in cloud yet (unless I'm missing something)?

It will be available in dbt Cloud, but with some functional gaps that we're working to close over the next ~month

> Is it also worth making a callout that they're only available in BQ, Snowflake, and Databricks earlier here?

Good call! Cody had the same thought and added a link

- Read [the discussion](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/discussions/5261)

> - Join the **#beta-feedback-python-models** channel in the dbt Community Slack

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Join the **#beta-feedback-python-models** channel in the [dbt Community Slack](https://www.getdbt.com/community/join-the-community/)
```

Below, you'll see sections entitled "Our questions." We're working to develop our opinionated recommendations ahead of the final release this October—and you can help!
:::

## What is a Python model in dbt?

A dbt Python model is a function that reads in dbt sources or models, applies a series of transformations, and returns a transformed dataset. Just like SQL models!

Unlike SQL models, which return a `select` statement, each Python model returns a single <Term id="dataframe">data frame</Term>. When you run a Python model, the result of that data frame will be saved as a table in your data warehouse.

Each Python model lives in a `.py` file in your `models/` folder. It defines a function named **`model()`**, which has two parameters:
- **`dbt`**: A class compiled by dbt Core, unique to each model, that enables you to run your Python code in the context of your dbt project and DAG.

> - **`session`**: A class representing the connection to the backing engine, which allows you to interact with the data platform. The session is needed to read in tables as data frames, and to writ data frames back to tables. In PySpark, by convention, the `SparkSession` is named `spark`, and available globally. For consistency across platforms, we always pass it into the `model` function as an explicit argument named `session`.

Reviewer: typo: `writ` to `write`

> - **`session`**: A class representing the connection to the backing engine, which allows you to interact with the data platform. The session is needed to read in tables as data frames, and to writ data frames back to tables. In PySpark, by convention, the `SparkSession` is named `spark`, and available globally. For consistency across platforms, we always pass it into the `model` function as an explicit argument named `session`.

Reviewer: As someone who hasn't tried this out yet, when I run a specific python model with `dbt run --select my_python_model` - do I need to do anything to pass in the parameters for `dbt` and `session`? Or is that done automatically?

Author: Yup, good point of clarification — these arguments are populated by dbt when you run the model. Nothing you need to pass in, you just need to define the function that accepts them.

> - **`session`**: A class representing the connection to the backing engine, which allows you to interact with the data platform. The session is needed to read in tables as data frames, and to writ data frames back to tables. In PySpark, by convention, the `SparkSession` is named `spark`, and available globally. For consistency across platforms, we always pass it into the `model` function as an explicit argument named `session`.

Reviewer 3: Call out of convention is great!

> - returns: a data frame (Snowpark, PySpark, or Pandas)

Reviewer 3: We only support materialize pandas df in snowflake right now

Reviewer 4: In addition to Chenyu's comment, shouldn't we list which df style is supported on which platform? e.g. what dfs work with BQ?

Reviewer 4: I would also put a link to the bottom of the page where we explain the tradeoffs and differences between those

dbt Python models have access to almost all of the same configuration options as SQL models. You can test them, document them, add `tags` and `meta` properties to them, persist their descriptions as database comments, grant access on their results to other users, and so on. You can select them by their name, their file path, their configurations, whether they are upstream or downstream of another model, or whether they have been modified compared to a previous project state.

### Referencing other models

> Your Python model will want to read data from other models (SQL or Python). Do this using the `dbt.ref()` function. The same idea applies for raw source tables, via `dbt.source()`. Those functions return data frames, pointing to the upstream source, model, seed, or snapshot. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your Python model will want to read data from other models (SQL or Python) or sources. Do this using the `dbt.ref()` function. The same idea applies for raw source tables, via `dbt.source()`. Those functions return data frames, pointing to the upstream source, model, seed, or snapshot. 
```

    upstream_source = dbt.source("upstream_source_name", "table_name")
```

</File>

Of course, you can `ref()` your Python model in downstream SQL models, too:

<File name='models/downstream_model.sql'>

```sql
with upstream_python_model as (
  
    select * from {{ ref('my_python_model') }}
  
),

...
```

</File>

### Configuring Python models

Just like with SQL models, there are three ways to configure Python models:
1. In `dbt_project.yml`, where you can configure many models at once
2. In a dedicated `.yml` file, within the `models/` directory
3. Within the model's `.py` file, using the `dbt.config()` function

The `dbt.config()` function allows you to set configurations for your model:

<File name='models/my_python_model.py'>

```python
def model(dbt, session):
    
    # setting configuration
    dbt.config(materialized="table")
```

</File>

The `config()` function accepts _only_ literal values (strings, booleans, and numeric types). It is not possible to pass another function or more complex data structure. The reason: dbt statically analyzes the arguments to `config()` while parsing your model, without actually executing any of your Python code.

> Python models have limited access to project context, including inputs such as `var`, `env_var`, and `target`. If you want to use those values to power conditional logic in your model, we recommend passing them through a dedicated `.yml` file config instead:

Reviewer 5: Does this mean "there's not much access to project context, you only have var, env_var and target"? That's how I first read it, but then reading the code sample I suspect it's the opposite: "there isn’t much access to project context, you don't even get var, env_var or target"

In addition to clarifying this sentence, it might be useful to have a list of what things are/aren't available to Python (if that's a dozenish items - less so if it's hundreds)

Author: > there isn’t much access to project context, you don't even get var, env_var or target

Correct. In the current implementation, you get almost nothing, _unless_ you pass it in explicitly as `config`. That does get you access to `var`, `env_var`, `target` if you'd like. But no config-setting via macros, no `graph` introspection.

<File name='models/config.yml'>

```yml
version: 2

models:
  - name: my_python_model
    config:
      materialized: table
      target_name: "{{ target.name }}"
      specific_env_var: "{{ env_var('SPECIFIC_ENV_VAR') }}"
```

</File>

Then, use the `dbt.config.get()` function to _access_ values of configurations that have been set:

<File name='models/my_python_model.py'>

```python
def model(dbt, session):
    ...
    target_name = dbt.config.get("target_name")
    orders_df = dbt.ref("fct_orders")
    
    # limit data in dev
    if target_name == "dev":
        orders_df = orders_df.limit(500)
```

</File>

### Materializations

> Python models support two materializations:

Reviewer: @jtcohen6 is it worth adding a call out as to why it can't materialize as a view and ephemeral?

On a similar train of thought, can you configure these as snapshots? I assume not?

Author: Good point re: ephemeral, and clarifying no support for non-model resource types (snapshots, tests).

Views are tricky. I don't want to get _too_ into the weeds here. Views actually are supported by [Snowpark](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/developer-guide/snowpark/python/working-with-dataframes.html#creating-a-view-from-a-dataframe), but there isn't an analogue in PySpark. Up to us if we want to add it in a platform-specific way.

        df = df.filter(df.updated_at >= F.dateadd("day", F.lit(-3), F.current_timestamp()))
        
    ...
        
    return df
```

</File>

</div>

<div warehouse="PySpark">

<File name='models/my_python_model.py'>

```python
import pyspark.sql.functions as F

def model(dbt, session):
    dbt.config(materialized = "incremental")
    df = dbt.ref("upstream_table")
    
    if dbt.is_incremental:

        # only new rows compared to max in current table
        max_from_this = f"select max(updated_at) from {dbt.this}"
        df = df.filter(df.updated_at >= session.sql(max_from_this).collect()[0][0])

        # or only rows from the past 3 days
        df = df.filter(df.updated_at >= F.date_add(F.current_timestamp(), F.lit(-3)))
    
    ...
    
    return df
```

</File>

</div>

</WHCode>

**Note:** Incremental models are not yet supported on BigQuery.

## Python-specific functionality

### Defining functions

In addition to defining a `model` function, the Python model can import other functions, or define its own functions. Here's an example, on Snowpark, defining a custom `add_one` function:

<File name='models/my_python_model.py'>

```python
def add_one(x):

>     return x + 1

Reviewer 5: Are functions only:
- user-definable inside of the same file
- importable from a public PyPI package
? 

Or can you do something chaotic like `import add_one from my_python_model` in `my_second_python_model.py`?

Related but broader question: I assume there are no Python macros? Either Jinja to template python or a global space for `add_one` to be defined once

Reviewer 3: Currently you cannot do that. It is possible to support(not very pretty way). @jtcohen6 maybe that's something to call out that we don't support it.

Author: I really consider this an open question for us!

I'm disinclined to do this one, given the chaos it could lead to, and over-reliance on the local file system:
> Or can you do something chaotic like `import add_one from my_python_model` in `my_second_python_model.py`?

I think we have two good options to pursue:
- Some platforms support registering these functions as "named" / persistent UDFs. This would be the case for "dbt should know about `function`s." These UDFs have some drawbacks; inconsistent support; and the main use case seems to be defining a Python UDF that then gets called from within a SQL model. That seems valuable for exposing a prediction function output of a trained ML model, less so for a utility like `add_one`.
- Potentially more promising: most of these platforms allow you to upload your _own_ home-spun "Python package," as a `.zip`, ==. You could then `import` it and use its functions, as if it were a public PyPI package.

Reviewer 5: I agree that you shouldn't be able to do arbitrary imports from functions defined in other models in the `models/` directory.

> most of these platforms allow you to upload your own home-spun "Python package," as a .zip, ==. You could then import it and use its functions, as if it were a public PyPI package

Where would the code that gets zipped and uploaded be source controlled? This feels very analogous to the before-state of https://discourse.getdbt.com/t/using-dbt-to-manage-user-defined-functions/18 - code is magically available but no one really knows where it came from. 

If we can resolve that, I do like the idea of an internal functions package. 

Would finding `.py` functions defined in the `macros` directory (or add `functions/` to your `macro-paths`) and embedding them all into an internal package be good enough at breaking reliance on the filesystem? This assumes that you're disinclined to enable imports from inside a model because it would be bad practice, not that it would be hard to implement technically.

Author: > Where would the code that gets zipped and uploaded be source controlled?

Yup — 100% needs to live within the dbt project, and be version-controlled along with it.

I think that "upload" step will require different behind-the-scenes implementations across different data warehouses. We could even opt for UDFs as the backing implementation, if a given warehouse doesn't support arbitrary package upload. There's risk of a leaky abstraction here, but it feels like a place where dbt can help in a big way, and where we won't see the full value of Python models without some answer here.

Questions we need to answer:
- Is this "upload" step part of `dbt deps`? What if these reusable methods live in the root project, rather than a dbt package?
- How to support the transition from local &rarr; cloud development (if we want to preserve that workflow)?
- Those Python models should ideally be (a) pure functions with (b) thorough unit testing. Can dbt help here? Or should we encourage standard best practices Python development (`pytest` etc)?

@lostmygithubaccount @ChenyuLInx This feels like one of our highest-priority spikes during the v1.3 beta &rarr; final period.

#### Configuring packages

We encourage you to explicitly configure required packages and versions, so that dbt can track them in project metadata. This configuration is required for the implementation on some platforms. If you need specific versions of packages, specify them.

<File name='models/my_python_model.py'>

```python
def model(dbt, session):
    dbt.config(
      packages = ["numpy==1.23.1", "scikit-learn"]
    )
```

</File>

<File name='models/config.yml'>

```yml
version: 2

models:
  - name: my_python_model
    config:
      packages:
        - "numpy==1.23.1"
        - scikit-learn
```

</File>

#### UDFs

You can use the `@udf` decorator or `udf` function to define an "anonymous" function, and call it within your `model` function's dataframe transformation. This is a common pattern for applying more complex functions as data frame operations, especially if those functions require inputs from third-party packages.
- [Snowpark Python: Creating UDFs](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/developer-guide/snowpark/python/creating-udfs.html)
- ["PySpark functions: udf"](https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/reference/pyspark.sql/api/pyspark.sql.functions.udf.html)

> :::info ❔ Our questions

Reviewer 2: Should we make the question mark a red one? I couldn't see the white/gray one at first and a red one will probably catch the eye more.

Reviewer 5: Probably overkill for this single page, but we can control how admonitions are rendered: https://docusaurus.io/docs/next/markdown-features/admonitions#customizing-rendering-behavior

Author: I played around with a few options, and I think I'm going to go with `:::note` + red question mark for now

**Why _not_ Pandas?** Performance. Pandas runs "single-node" transformations, which cannot benefit from the parallelism and distributed compute offered by modern data warehouses. This quickly becomes a problem as you operate on larger datasets. Some data platforms do support optimizations for code written using Pandas' data frame API, preventing the need for major refactors. For example, ["Pandas on PySpark"](https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/getting_started/quickstart_ps.html) offers support for 95% of Pandas functionality using the same API.

:::info ❔ Our questions
When developing a new dbt Python model, should we recommend Pandas-style syntax for rapid iteration, and then refactor? Which open source libraries provide compelling abstractions across different data engines and vendor-specific APIs? Should dbt attempt to play a longer-term role in standardizing across them?
:::

### Limitations

Python models have capabilities that SQL models do not. They also have some drawbacks compared to SQL models:

> - **Time and cost.** Python models are slower to run than SQL models, and the cloud resources that run them can be more expensive. Running Python requires more general-purpose compute, and in some cases that compute may live on a separate service or architecture from your SQL models. However, we believe that deploying Python models via dbt is **dramatically** faster and cheaper than spinning up separate tooling and infrastructure to orchestrate Python transformations in production.

Reviewer 3: In general I think the cost for the actual execution of the model is going to be similar, but we will save the cost to have separate orchestration and have better integration with the rest of your data that created by dbt project

Author: Yup - going to qualify that I mean cost from the perspective of the human maintaining this stuff

## Specific data warehouses

Currently, Python models are supported for users of `dbt-snowflake`, `dbt-spark` (Databricks), and `dbt-bigquery`.

<WHCode>

<div warehouse="Snowflake">

**Additional setup:** None needed. Snowpark Python is in Public Preview - Open, and enabled by default for all accounts.

**Installing packages:** Snowpark supports a number of popular packages via Anaconda. The full list is at https://repo.anaconda.com/pkgs/snowflake/. Packages are installed at the time your model is being run. Different models can have different package dependencies. If you are using third-party packages, for better performance, Snowflake recommends using a dedicated virtual warehouse, rather than one that's likely to have many concurrent users.

**Docs:** ["Developer Guide: Snowpark Python"](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/developer-guide/snowpark/python/index.html)

</div>

<div warehouse="Databricks">

**Additional setup:** The `user` field in the `dbt-spark` profile, usually optional, is required for Python modeling.

> **Note:** Python models will be created and run as notebooks in your Databricks workspace. The notebooks will be created within the personal workspace of the `user` running dbt.

Reviewer 3: Should we add that we don't delete the notebook so you can use it for interactive development of model and bring the code back?

Author: Good call!

**Installing packages:** We recommend configuring packages on the interactive cluster which you will be using to run your Python models.

**Docs:**
- [PySpark dataframe syntax](https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/reference/pyspark.sql/api/pyspark.sql.DataFrame.html)
- [Databricks: Introduction to DataFrames - Python](https://docs.databricks.com/spark/latest/dataframes-datasets/introduction-to-dataframes-python.html)

</div>

<div warehouse="BigQuery">

The `dbt-bigquery` uses a service called Dataproc to submit your Python models as PySpark jobs. That Python/PySpark code will read from your tables and views in BigQuery, and saves its final result back to BigQuery.

**Additional setup:**
- Create a dedicated Dataproc cluster: https://cloud.google.com/dataproc/docs/guides/create-cluster

> - Create a dedicated Cloud Storage bucket: https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/creating-buckets

Reviewer 3: Maybe dedicated is a bit dramatic if user already have those setup they can just use it

Author: looks like Cody had the same thought - let's tone down the drama

:::

## What is a Python model in dbt?

A dbt Python model is a function that reads in dbt sources or models, applies a series of transformations, and returns a transformed dataset. Just like SQL models!

Unlike SQL models, which return a `select` statement, each Python model returns a single <Term id="dataframe">data frame</Term>. When you run a Python model, the result of that data frame will be saved as a table in your data warehouse.

Each Python model lives in a `.py` file in your `models/` folder. It defines a function named **`model()`**, which has two parameters:
- **`dbt`**: A class compiled by dbt Core, unique to each model, that enables you to run your Python code in the context of your dbt project and DAG.
- **`session`**: A class representing the connection to the backing engine, which allows you to interact with the data platform. The session is needed to read in tables as data frames, and to write data frames back to tables. In PySpark, by convention, the `SparkSession` is named `spark`, and available globally. For consistency across platforms, we always pass it into the `model` function as an explicit argument named `session`.

> - returns: a data frame (Snowpark, PySpark, or Pandas)

Reviewer 4: instead of "- returns" that makesit part of the parameters list I'd write "<newline> and returns ..."

Python models have limited access to project context, including inputs such as `var`, `env_var`, and `target`. If you want to use those values to power conditional logic in your model, we recommend passing them through a dedicated `.yml` file config instead:

<File name='models/config.yml'>

```yml
version: 2

models:
  - name: my_python_model
    config:
      materialized: table
      target_name: "{{ target.name }}"
      specific_env_var: "{{ env_var('SPECIFIC_ENV_VAR') }}"
```

</File>

Then, use the `dbt.config.get()` function to _access_ values of configurations that have been set:

<File name='models/my_python_model.py'>

```python
def model(dbt, session):
    ...
    target_name = dbt.config.get("target_name")
    orders_df = dbt.ref("fct_orders")
    
    # limit data in dev
    if target_name == "dev":
        orders_df = orders_df.limit(500)
```

</File>

### Materializations

Python models support two materializations:
- `table`

> - `incremental`

Reviewer 4: Are Python models supporting the same incremental strategies as their SQL counterparts?

Author: yessir!

    is_holiday = (date_col in french_holidays)
    return is_holiday

def model(dbt, session):
    dbt.config(
        materialized = "table",
        packages = ["holidays"]
    )
    
    orders_df = dbt.ref("stg_orders")
    
    # convert to pandas + lowercase all column names
    # (uppercase by default on Snowflake)
    df = orders_df.to_pandas()
    df.columns= df.columns.str.lower()
    
    # apply our function
    df["is_holiday"] = df["order_date"].apply(is_holiday)
    
    # return final dataset
    return df
```

</File>

#### Configuring packages

We encourage you to explicitly configure required packages and versions, so that dbt can track them in project metadata. This configuration is required for the implementation on some platforms. If you need specific versions of packages, specify them.

<File name='models/my_python_model.py'>

```python
def model(dbt, session):
    dbt.config(
      packages = ["numpy==1.23.1", "scikit-learn"]
    )
```

</File>

<File name='models/config.yml'>

```yml
version: 2

models:
  - name: my_python_model
    config:
      packages:
        - "numpy==1.23.1"
        - scikit-learn
```

</File>

> #### UDFs

Reviewer 4: Do we have an example? I personally am not sure about:
- how to create it
- how to use it

Author: That makes two of us :) I can try to get a simple working example of this

A data frame is a two dimensional data structure (rows and columns). It supports convenient methods for transforming that data, creating new columns from calculations performed on existing columns. It also offers convenient methods for previewing data while developing locally or in a notebook.

That's about where the agreement ends. There are numerous frameworks with their own syntaxes and APIs for data frames. The [Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/) library offered one of the original data frame APIs, and its syntax is the most common to learn for new data professionals. Most newer data frame APIs offer some degree of compatibility with Pandas-style syntax, though few can offer perfect interoperability. This is true for both Snowpark and PySpark, which have their own DataFrame APIs.

When developing a Python model, you will find yourself asking these questions:

**Why Pandas?** The most common API for data frames. Makes it easy to explore sampled data and develop transformations locally. For small datasets, you can "promote" your code as-is into dbt models, and run in production.

> **Why _not_ Pandas?** Performance. Pandas runs "single-node" transformations, which cannot benefit from the parallelism and distributed compute offered by modern data warehouses. This quickly becomes a problem as you operate on larger datasets. Some data platforms do support optimizations for code written using Pandas' data frame API, preventing the need for major refactors. For example, ["Pandas on PySpark"](https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/getting_started/quickstart_ps.html) offers support for 95% of Pandas functionality using the same API.

Reviewer 4: "offers support for 95% of Pandas functionality using the same API" => "offers support for 95% of Pandas functionality using the same API while still leveraging parallel processing"

As a general rule, if there's a transformation you could write equally well in SQL or in Python, we believe that well-written SQL is preferable: it's more accessible to a greater number of colleagues, and it's easier to write code that's performant at scale.

## Specific data warehouses

Currently, Python models are supported for users of `dbt-snowflake`, `dbt-spark` (Databricks), and `dbt-bigquery`.

<WHCode>

<div warehouse="Snowflake">

**Additional setup:** None needed. Snowpark Python is in Public Preview - Open, and enabled by default for all accounts.

**Installing packages:** Snowpark supports a number of popular packages via Anaconda. The full list is at https://repo.anaconda.com/pkgs/snowflake/. Packages are installed at the time your model is being run. Different models can have different package dependencies. If you are using third-party packages, for better performance, Snowflake recommends using a dedicated virtual warehouse, rather than one that's likely to have many concurrent users.

**Docs:** ["Developer Guide: Snowpark Python"](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/developer-guide/snowpark/python/index.html)

</div>

<div warehouse="Databricks">

> **Additional setup:** The `user` field in the `dbt-spark` profile, usually optional, is required for Python modeling.

Reviewer 4: Could we link the profile docs page here and for BQ?

---
title: "Python models"
---

:::info Beta

> This feature is arriving in dbt Core v1.3, which is currently in beta. Note that only [specific data warehouses](#specific-data-warehouses) support dbt Python models, and that support for some dbt Cloud capabilities will be in progress during the beta period.

Reviewer 6: not sure  what "some dbt Cloud capabilities" means here. do you mean to say
> these beta capabilities in Python will be available in a very limited capacity, but improved over the course of the beta

Author: Going with this for now:

> Support in dbt Cloud will be limited to start, and improve over the course of the beta.

I'm really talking about:
- Syntax highlighting in the IDE
- Support for profile configurations on Databricks + BQ
- Some breaking changes for the Metadata API

We're still thinking hard about the right behavior for "Preview Data" in the IDE, given how slow Python models are to run, compared to SQL models.

> This feature is arriving in dbt Core v1.3, which is currently in beta. Note that only [specific data warehouses](#specific-data-warehouses) support dbt Python models, and that support for some dbt Cloud capabilities will be in progress during the beta period.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
dbt Core v1.3, which is currently in beta, includes Python models. Note that only [specific data warehouses](#specific-data-warehouses) support dbt Python models, and that support for some dbt Cloud capabilities will be in progress during the beta period.
```

We encourage you to:

> - [Read the original discussion](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/discussions/5261)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- [Read the original discussion](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/discussions/5261) that shaped this feature.
```

> - [Weigh in on our developing best practices](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/discussions/1811)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Contribute to [best practices for developing Python models in dbt ](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/discussions/1811).
```

> - Join the **#beta-feedback-python-models** channel in the [dbt Community Slack](https://www.getdbt.com/community/join-the-community/)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Join the **#beta-feedback-python-models** channel in the [dbt Community Slack](https://www.getdbt.com/community/join-the-community/).
```

> Below, you'll see sections entitled "❓ **Our questions**." We're working to develop our opinionated recommendations ahead of the final release this October—and you can help! Comment in the GitHub discussions, leave thoughts in Slack, talk about it with colleagues and friends.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Below, you'll see sections entitled "❓ **Our questions**." We're working to develop our opinionated recommendations ahead of the final release this October—and you can help! Comment in the GitHub discussions, leave thoughts in Slack, discuss dbt Python models with colleagues and friends.
```

Author: I was trying to be a little cute here. Not sure if I'm achieving it, might be better to cut altogether:
```suggestion
Below, you'll see sections entitled "❓ **Our questions**." We're working to develop our opinionated recommendations ahead of the final release this October—and you can help! Comment in the GitHub discussions; leave thoughts in Slack; bring up dbt + Python in casual conversation with colleagues and friends.
```

:::

> ## What is a Python model in dbt?

Reviewer 7: I think we can broaden this a bit to excite people about Python models with the "why" it's so dang cool!
```suggestion
## About Python models in dbt
```

> A dbt Python model is a function that reads in dbt sources or models, applies a series of transformations, and returns a transformed dataset. Just like SQL models!

Reviewer 7: It would be nice to provide a tl;dr for the linked discussion/issue so we can spark interest for people who don't like to go off and read more. Can you add just another sentence or two? Possibly an example? I can help if you need it, @jtcohen6, but I wasn't sure what exactly to say. 
```suggestion
dbt Python models will help you solve use cases that you can't solve with SQL, and bring you closer to dbt when the data warehouse is your principal tool. 

A dbt Python model is a function that reads in dbt sources or models, applies a series of transformations, and returns a transformed dataset. Just like SQL models!
```

> Unlike SQL models, which return a `select` statement, each Python model returns a single <Term id="dataframe">DataFrame</Term>. When you run a Python model, the result of that DataFrame will be saved as a table in your data warehouse.

Reviewer 6: Been chewing on this line for a while now
```
A SQL model's format has always been something that can compile to jinja and be executed against the data platform and materialized as specified. dbt is used to declare the end state of the model, and the data platform's query engine does the work. What's different about Python models is that the `.py` file serves to define a Python function that outputs a `dataframe` object. When running a Python model, this dataframe is created, then materialized as specified. There are some parallels to the declarative nature of SQL vs. the imperative nature of Python

The "output" of a  model file is a `select` statement that is bundled into a corresponding `create table` or `create view` statement and sent to the datawarehouse. However, the mechanics 
Unlike SQL models, which return a `select` statement, each Python model returns a single <Term id="dataframe">DataFrame</Term>. When you run a Python model, the result of that DataFrame will be saved as a table in your data warehouse.
```

Author: I ended up taking a different tack here, incorporating Leona's feedback asking for a hook + higher-level intro

dbt Python models have access to almost all of the same configuration options as SQL models. You can test them, document them, add `tags` and `meta` properties to them, grant access on their results to other users, and so on. You can select them by their name, their file path, their configurations, whether they are upstream or downstream of another model, or whether they have been modified compared to a previous project state.

### Defining a Python model

Each Python model lives in a `.py` file in your `models/` folder. It defines a function named **`model()`**, which has two parameters:
- **`dbt`**: A class compiled by dbt Core, unique to each model, that enables you to run your Python code in the context of your dbt project and DAG.

> - **`session`**: A class representing the connection to the backing engine, which allows you to interact with the data platform. The session is needed to read in tables as DataFrames, and to write DataFrames back to tables. In PySpark, by convention, the `SparkSession` is named `spark`, and available globally. For consistency across platforms, we always pass it into the `model` function as an explicit argument named `session`.

Reviewer 6: does the end user ever have to modify these parameters to be different than `dbt` and `session`? If not, why expose them to users at all?

Author: The end user needs to access classmethods of `dbt`, and some properties of `session` as well. We think, better to document those and make it clearer where they're coming from, rather than pulling them out of the aether.

We could have gone for a "script"-style approach, where `dbt` and `session` appear to be available "globally":
```python
def some_fn:
    ...
    
some_df = dbt.ref("some_model")
final_df = some_df.apply(some_fn)

final_df
```
Where really we just take users' code, and turn it into:
```python
def model(dbt, session):
    def some_fn:
        ...
    
    some_df = dbt.ref("some_model")
    final_df = some_df.apply(some_fn)

    return final_df  # we add this return?
```
It's still an option we could consider, if people like that a lot better! (@ChenyuLInx)

> - **`session`**: A class representing the connection to the backing engine, which allows you to interact with the data platform. The session is needed to read in tables as DataFrames, and to write DataFrames back to tables. In PySpark, by convention, the `SparkSession` is named `spark`, and available globally. For consistency across platforms, we always pass it into the `model` function as an explicit argument named `session`.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- **`session`**: A class representing the connection to the backend engine, which allows you to interact with the data platform. The session is needed to read in tables as DataFrames, and to write DataFrames back to tables. In PySpark, by convention, the `SparkSession` is named `spark`, and available globally. For consistency across platforms, we always pass it into the `model` function as an explicit argument named `session`.
```

Reviewer 8: not sure if this was a typo so just flagging

> The `model()` function must return a single DataFrame. On Snowpark (Snowflake), this can be a Snowpark or Pandas DataFrame. On PySpark (Databricks + BigQuery), this should be a PySpark DataFrame (converted back from Pandas if needed). For more about choosing between Pandas and native DataFrames, see ["DataFrame API + syntax"](#dataframe-api--syntax)

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The `model()` function must return a single DataFrame. On Snowpark (Snowflake), this can be a Snowpark or Pandas DataFrame. On PySpark (Databricks + BigQuery), this should be a PySpark DataFrame (converted back from Pandas if needed). For more about choosing between Pandas and native DataFrames, see ["DataFrame API + syntax"](#dataframe-api--syntax).
```

<File name='models/my_python_model.py'>

```python
def model(dbt, session):
  
    ...
    
    return final_df
```

</File>

When you `dbt run --select python_model`, dbt will prepare and pass in both arguments (`dbt` and `session`). All you have to do is define the `model()` function that accepts them.

### Referencing other models

> Your Python model will want to read data from other models (SQL or Python) or sources. Do this using the `dbt.ref()` function. The same idea applies for raw source tables, via `dbt.source()`. Those functions return DataFrames, pointing to the upstream source, model, seed, or snapshot. 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Use the `dbt.ref()` function to let your Python model read data from other models (SQL or Python) or sources. The same idea applies for raw source tables from `dbt.source()`. Those functions return DataFrames, pointing to the upstream source, model, seed, or snapshot. 
```

> Your Python model will want to read data from other models (SQL or Python) or sources. Do this using the `dbt.ref()` function. The same idea applies for raw source tables, via `dbt.source()`. Those functions return DataFrames, pointing to the upstream source, model, seed, or snapshot. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Your Python model will want to read data from other models (SQL or Python) or sources. Do this using `dbt`'s `ref()` method. The same idea applies for raw source tables, via `dbt.source()`. Both methods return DataFrames, pointing to the upstream source, model, seed, or snapshot. 

```

<File name='models/my_python_model.py'>

```python
def model(dbt, session):
  
    # DataFrame representing an upstream model
    upstream_model = dbt.ref("upstream_model_name")
    
    # DataFrame representing an upstream source

>     upstream_source = dbt.source("upstream_source_name", "table_name")

Reviewer 6: are these lazily-evaluated references? or does `dbt.source()` read the reference into memory at time of definition?

Author: Lazy evaluation if you're using a DataFrame API worth its salt — so yes! As soon as you convert to Pandas, though, that will read everything into memory.

    
    ...
```

</File>

Of course, you can `ref()` your Python model in downstream SQL models, too:

<File name='models/downstream_model.sql'>

```sql
with upstream_python_model as (
  
    select * from {{ ref('my_python_model') }}
  
),

...
```

</File>

### Configuring Python models

Just like SQL models, there are three ways to configure Python models:
1. In `dbt_project.yml`, where you can configure many models at once
2. In a dedicated `.yml` file, within the `models/` directory

> 3. Within the model's `.py` file, using the `dbt.config()` function

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
3. Within the model's `.py` file, using the `dbt.config()` method
```

> The `dbt.config()` function allows you to set configurations for your model within your Python file:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Using the `dbt.config()` method within your `model()` definition allows you to set configurations within your Python file, similar to how you would for a `.sql` model:
```

<File name='models/my_python_model.py'>

```python
def model(dbt, session):
    
    # setting configuration
    dbt.config(materialized="table")
```

</File>

> The `config()` function accepts _only_ literal values (strings, booleans, and numeric types). It is not possible to pass another function or more complex data structure. The reason: dbt statically analyzes the arguments to `config()` while parsing your model, without actually executing any of your Python code.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The `config()` function accepts _only_ literal values (strings, booleans, and numeric types). It's not possible to pass another function or a more complex data structure. The reason is because dbt statically analyzes the arguments to `config()` while parsing your model, without actually executing any of your Python code.
```

> The `config()` function accepts _only_ literal values (strings, booleans, and numeric types). It is not possible to pass another function or more complex data structure. The reason: dbt statically analyzes the arguments to `config()` while parsing your model, without actually executing any of your Python code.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
There's a hard limit as to how fancy you can get with the  `.config()` method because it accepts _only_ literal values (strings, booleans, and numeric types). It is not possible to pass another function or more complex data structure. The reason: dbt statically analyzes the arguments to `config()` while parsing your model, without actually executing any of your Python code.
```

#### Accessing project context

> dbt Python models do not use Jinja to render compiled code. Compared to SQL models, Python models have very limited access to global project context. That context is made available via the `dbt` class, passed in as an argument to the `model()` function.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
dbt Python models don't use Jinja to render compiled code. Compared to SQL models, Python models have very limited access to global project context. That context is made available from the `dbt` class, passed in as an argument to the `model()` function.
```

Out of the box, the `dbt` class supports:
- Returning DataFrames referencing the locations of other resources: `dbt.ref()` + `dbt.source()`
- Accessing the database location of the current model: `dbt.this()` (also: `dbt.this.database`, `.schema`, `.identifier`)
- Determining if the current model's run is incremental: `dbt.is_incremental`

It is possible to extend this context by setting custom configurations on your Python model, and then "getting" them via `dbt.config.get()`. This includes inputs such as `var`, `env_var`, and `target`. If you want to use those values to power conditional logic in your model, we recommend setting them through a dedicated `.yml` file config instead:

<File name='models/config.yml'>

```yml
version: 2

models:
  - name: my_python_model
    config:
      materialized: table
      target_name: "{{ target.name }}"\
      specific_var: "{{ var('SPECIFIC_VAR') }}"
      specific_env_var: "{{ env_var('SPECIFIC_ENV_VAR') }}"
```

</File>

> Then, within the model's Python code, use the `dbt.config.get()` function to _access_ values of configurations that have been set:

Reviewer 6: ```
Then, within the model's Python code, use the `dbt.config.get()` method to _access_ values of configurations that have been set:
```

<File name='models/my_python_model.py'>

```python
def model(dbt, session):
    target_name = dbt.config.get("target_name")
    specific_var = dbt.config.get("specific_var")

>     specific_env_var = dbt.config.get("specific_env_var")

Reviewer 6: @lostmygithubaccount this brings back many azureml sdk argparse memories. I'm trying to remember the hack I had to just unpack all the config into a dictionary... at the risk of saying something crazy, perhaps arg parse could help us make things more simple? idk
https://stackoverflow.com/a/22570801/3842610

Author: The way Chenyu implemented this, dbt will statically analyze the literals being passed into `config.get()`, and then supply _just_ those config values in the compiled code. Is that more magic or less magic?

    
    orders_df = dbt.ref("fct_orders")
    
    # limit data in dev
    if target_name == "dev":
        orders_df = orders_df.limit(500)
```

</File>

### Materializations

Python models support two materializations:
- `table`
- `incremental`

> Incremental Python models support all the same [incremental strategies](configuring-incremental-models#about-incremental_strategy) as their SQL counterparts, for the adapter on which they're running.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Incremental Python models support all the same [incremental strategies](configuring-incremental-models#about-incremental_strategy) as their SQL counterparts, for the adapter they're running on.
```

> At present, Python models cannot be materialized as `view` or `ephemeral`. Python is not supported for non-model resource types (e.g. tests, snapshots).

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
At present, Python models can't be materialized as `view` or `ephemeral`. Python isn't supported for non-model resource types (e.g. tests, snapshots).
```

def model(dbt, session):
    dbt.config(materialized = "incremental")
    df = dbt.ref("upstream_table")
    
    if dbt.is_incremental:

        # only new rows compared to max in current table
        max_from_this = f"select max(updated_at) from {dbt.this}"
        df = df.filter(df.updated_at >= session.sql(max_from_this).collect()[0][0])

        # or only rows from the past 3 days
        df = df.filter(df.updated_at >= F.dateadd("day", F.lit(-3), F.current_timestamp()))
        
    ...
        
    return df
```

</File>

</div>

<div warehouse="PySpark">

<File name='models/my_python_model.py'>

```python
import pyspark.sql.functions as F

def model(dbt, session):
    dbt.config(materialized = "incremental")
    df = dbt.ref("upstream_table")
    
    if dbt.is_incremental:

        # only new rows compared to max in current table
        max_from_this = f"select max(updated_at) from {dbt.this}"
        df = df.filter(df.updated_at >= session.sql(max_from_this).collect()[0][0])

        # or only rows from the past 3 days
        df = df.filter(df.updated_at >= F.date_add(F.current_timestamp(), F.lit(-3)))
    
    ...
    
    return df
```

</File>

</div>

</WHCode>

> **Note:** Incremental models are not yet supported on BigQuery.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
**Note:** Incremental models aren't currently supported on BigQuery.
```

## Python-specific functionality

### Defining functions

In addition to defining a `model` function, the Python model can import other functions or define its own. Here's an example, on Snowpark, defining a custom `add_one` function:

<File name='models/my_python_model.py'>

```python
def add_one(x):
    return x + 1

def model(dbt, session):
    dbt.config(materialized="table")
    temps_df = dbt.ref("temperatures")
    
    # warm things up just a little
    df = temps_df.withColumn("degree_plus_one", add_one(temps_df["degree"]))
    return df
```

</File>

> At present, Python functions defined in one dbt model cannot be imported and reused in other models. See the section below, ["Code reuse"](#code-reuse), for the patterns we're considering.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
At present, Python functions defined in one dbt model can't be imported and reused in other models. See the ["Code reuse"](#code-reuse) section for the patterns we're considering.
```

### Using PyPI packages

> You can also define functions that depend on installed packages. In this example, we use the `holidays` package to determine if a given date fell on a holiday in France. For simplicity and consistency across platforms, the code below uses the Pandas API. The exact syntax, and the need to refactor for multi-node processing, still varies.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
You can also define functions that depend on installed packages. In this example, we use the `holidays` package to determine if a given date is a holiday in France. For simplicity and consistency across platforms, the code below uses the `pandas` API. The exact syntax and the need to refactor for multi-node processing still varies.
```

    )
    
    orders_df = dbt.ref("stg_orders")
    
    df = orders_df.to_pandas()
    
    # apply our function
    # (columns need to be in uppercase on Snowpark)
    df["IS_HOLIDAY"] = df["ORDER_DATE"].apply(is_holiday)
    
    # return final dataset (Pandas DataFrame)
    return df
```

</File>

</div>

<div warehouse="PySpark">

<File name='models/my_python_model.py'>

```python
import holidays

def is_holiday(date_col):
    # Chez Jaffle
    french_holidays = holidays.France()
    is_holiday = (date_col in french_holidays)
    return is_holiday

def model(dbt, session):
    dbt.config(
        materialized = "table",
        packages = ["holidays"]
    )
    
    orders_df = dbt.ref("stg_orders")
    
    df = orders_df.to_pandas_on_spark()  # Spark 3.2+
    # df = orders_df.toPandas() in earlier versions
    
    # apply our function
    df["is_holiday"] = df["order_date"].apply(is_holiday)
    
    # convert back to PySpark
    df = df.to_spark()               # Spark 3.2+
    # df = session.createDataFrame(df) in earlier versions
    
    # return final dataset (PySpark DataFrame)
    return df
```

</File>

</div>

</WHCode>

#### Configuring packages

> We encourage you to explicitly configure required packages and versions, so that dbt can track them in project metadata. This configuration is required for the implementation on some platforms. If you need specific versions of packages, specify them.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
We encourage you to explicitly configure required packages and versions so dbt can track them in project metadata. This configuration is required for the implementation on some platforms. If you need specific versions of packages, specify them.
```

:::note ❓ Our questions

- Should dbt have a role in abstracting over UDFs? Should dbt support a new type of DAG node, `function`? Would the primary use case be code reuse across Python models, or defining Python-language functions that can be called from SQL models?
- How can dbt help users when uploading or initializing private Python assets? Is this a new form of `dbt deps`?
- How can dbt support users who want to test custom functions? If defined as UDFs: "unit testing" in the database? If "pure" functions in packages: encourage adoption of `pytest`?
:::

### DataFrame API + syntax

Over the past decade, most people writing data transformations in Python have adopted <Term id="dataframe">DataFrame</Term> as their common abstraction. dbt follows this convention by returning `ref()` and `source()` as DataFrames, and it expects all Python models to return a DataFrame.

> A DataFrame is a two dimensional data structure (rows and columns). It supports convenient methods for transforming that data, creating new columns from calculations performed on existing columns. It also offers convenient methods for previewing data while developing locally or in a notebook.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
A DataFrame is a two-dimensional data structure (rows and columns). It supports convenient methods for transforming that data, creating new columns from calculations performed on existing columns. It also offers convenient methods for previewing data while developing locally or in a notebook.
```

**Why _not_ Pandas?** Performance. Pandas runs "single-node" transformations, which cannot benefit from the parallelism and distributed compute offered by modern data warehouses. This quickly becomes a problem as you operate on larger datasets. Some data platforms do support optimizations for code written using Pandas' DataFrame API, preventing the need for major refactors. For example, ["Pandas on PySpark"](https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/getting_started/quickstart_ps.html) offers support for 95% of Pandas functionality, using the same API, while still leveraging parallel processing.

:::note ❓ Our questions
- When developing a new dbt Python model, should we recommend Pandas-style syntax for rapid iteration, and then refactor?
- Which open source libraries provide compelling abstractions across different data engines and vendor-specific APIs?
- Should dbt attempt to play a longer-term role in standardizing across them?
:::

### Limitations

Python models have capabilities that SQL models do not. They also have some drawbacks compared to SQL models:

> - **Time and cost.** Python models are slower to run than SQL models, and the cloud resources that run them can be more expensive. Running Python requires more general-purpose compute, and in some cases that compute may live on a separate service or architecture from your SQL models. **However:** We believe that deploying Python models via dbt—with unified lineage, testing, and documentation—is, from a human standpoint, **dramatically** faster and cheaper. By comparison, spinning up separate infrastructure to orchestrate Python transformations in production, and separate tooling to integrate with dbt, is much more time-consuming and expensive.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- **Time and cost.** Python models are slower to run than SQL models, and the cloud resources that run them can be more expensive. Running Python requires more general-purpose compute and, in some cases, that compute might live on a separate service or architecture from your SQL models. **However:** We believe that deploying Python models via dbt—with unified lineage, testing, and documentation—is, from a human standpoint, **dramatically** faster and cheaper. By comparison, spinning up separate infrastructure to orchestrate Python transformations in production, and separate tooling to integrate with dbt, is much more time-consuming and expensive.
```

- **Syntax differences** are even more pronounced. Over the years, dbt has done a lot, via dispatch patterns and packages such as `dbt_utils`, to abstract over differences in SQL dialects across popular data warehouses. Python offers a **much** wider field of play. If there are 5 ways to do something in SQL, there are 500 ways to write it in Python, all with varying performance and adherence to standards. Those options can be overwhelming. As the maintainers of dbt, we will be learning from state-of-the-art projects that are tackling this problem, and sharing opinionated guidance as we develop it.
- **These capabilities are very new.** As data warehouses develop new features, we expect them to offer cheaper, faster, and more intuitive mechanisms for deploying Python transformations. We reserve the right to change the underlying implementation for executing Python models. Our commitment to you is around the code in your model `.py` files, following the guidance above.

> As a general rule, if there's a transformation you could write equally well in SQL or in Python, we believe that well-written SQL is preferable: it's more accessible to a greater number of colleagues, and it's easier to write code that's performant at scale. If there's a transformation you _cannot_ write in SQL, or where 10 lines of elegant and well-annotated Python could save you 1000 lines of hard-to-read Jinja-SQL, Python is the way to go.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
As a general rule, if there's a transformation you could write equally well in SQL or in Python, we believe that well-written SQL is preferable: it's more accessible to a greater number of colleagues, and it's easier to write code that's performant at scale. If there's a transformation you _can't_ write in SQL, or where 10 lines of elegant and well-annotated Python could save you 1000 lines of hard-to-read Jinja-SQL, Python is the way to go.
```

## Specific data warehouses

Currently, Python models are supported for users of `dbt-snowflake`, `dbt-spark` (Databricks), and `dbt-bigquery`. Both Databricks and BigQuery use PySpark as the processing framework. Snowflake uses its own framework, Snowpark, which has many similarities to PySpark.

:::caution

The implementation for Python models on GCP (BigQuery + Dataproc) is the roughest of the three. Running PySpark on Dataproc requires more manual setup and configuration. Clusters require sufficient resources or auto-scaling policies to handle concurrent Python model runs.

We have made the code available for the beta, but we are reserving the right to leave it out of the final v1.3 release if the experience is too unfriendly to end users. If you're a GCP expert, we're very open to hearing your thoughts in Slack or the GitHub discussions!

> :::

Author: @dataders This reads a bit too harsh right now. My goal here is to set clear expectations for any BQ users around both (a) the setup experience, (b) the possibility that this functionality is cut from v1.3 (final). Definitely open to your wordsmithing

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
:::caution

Here be dragons; this implementation for Python models on GCP (BigQuery + Dataproc) needs the most love of the three before the official release.

For example, running PySpark on Dataproc requires more manual setup and configuration. Clusters require sufficient resources or auto-scaling policies to handle concurrent Python model runs.

We have made the code available for the beta, but we are reserving the right to leave it out of the final v1.3 release if the experience is too unfriendly to end users. If you're a GCP expert, we'd love your help; please share your thoughts in Slack or the GitHub discussions!

:::
```

<WHCode>

<div warehouse="Snowflake">

**Additional setup:** None needed. Snowpark Python is in Public Preview - Open, and enabled by default for all accounts.

> **Installing packages:** Snowpark supports a number of popular packages via Anaconda. The full list is at https://repo.anaconda.com/pkgs/snowflake/. Packages are installed at the time your model is being run. Different models can have different package dependencies. If you are using third-party packages, for better performance, Snowflake recommends using a dedicated virtual warehouse, rather than one that's likely to have many concurrent users.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
**Installing packages:** Snowpark supports a number of popular packages via Anaconda. The full list is at https://repo.anaconda.com/pkgs/snowflake/. Packages are installed at the time your model is being run. Different models can have different package dependencies. If you are using third-party packages, Snowflake recommends using a dedicated virtual warehouse for better performance, rather than one that's likely to have many concurrent users.
```

**Docs:** ["Developer Guide: Snowpark Python"](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/developer-guide/snowpark/python/index.html)

</div>

<div warehouse="Databricks">

> **Additional setup:** The `user` field in your [Spark connection profile](spark-profile), usually optional, is required for running Python models.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
**Additional setup:** The `user` field in your [Spark connection profile](spark-profile) (which is usually optional) is required for running Python models.
```

> **Note:** Python models will be created and run as notebooks in your Databricks workspace. The notebook will be created within the personal workspace of the `user` running dbt, and named after the model it is executing. dbt will update the notebooks on subsequent runs of the same model, but it will not delete it—so you can use the notebook for quicker interactive development. Just remember to update the code in your dbt model, based on your in-notebook iteration, before the next `dbt run`.

Reviewer 6: I feel there's an opportunity to be more explicit about the proposed workflow.
```suggestion
**Note:** Python models will be created and run as notebooks in your Databricks workspace. The notebook will be created within the personal workspace of the `user` running dbt, and named after the model it is executing. dbt will update the notebooks on subsequent runs of the same model, but it will not delete it. We're thinking of this as a feature rather than a bug. The idea being that you can

  1. scaffold a simple version of the model and `run` it,
  2. go to Databricks to interactively develop it to the desired state, then
  3. copy your changes back into your dbt `.py` model and call `dbt run` again
```

Author: yes, good framing!

> **Installing packages:** We recommend configuring packages on the interactive cluster which you will be using to run your Python models.

Reviewer 6: are we recommending to initially install all the packages you might use before creating python models in lieu of specifying requirements as part of a Python model's specifification? As in, it's not  easy/possible/practical to configure model-specific python environments, so just do it once manually outside of dbt?

Author: This totally varies based on the backend / implementation. On Databricks, it _is_ possible to tell a cluster to run `pip install <some_package>` in a first notebook cell. That can take quite a bit of time, though. Their recommendation (and it makes sense to me) is to configure the needed packages on the cluster ahead of time.

By configuring packages in that way, it does mean that two models cannot have conflicting package version requirements. I think that's a recipe for disaster, anyway...

**Docs:**
- [PySpark dataframe syntax](https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/reference/pyspark.sql/api/pyspark.sql.DataFrame.html)
- [Databricks: Introduction to DataFrames - Python](https://docs.databricks.com/spark/latest/dataframes-datasets/introduction-to-dataframes-python.html)

</div>

<div warehouse="BigQuery">

> The `dbt-bigquery` adapter uses a service called Dataproc to submit your Python models as PySpark jobs. That Python/PySpark code will read from your tables and views in BigQuery, and saves its final result back to BigQuery.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The `dbt-bigquery` adapter uses a service called Dataproc to submit your Python models as PySpark jobs. That Python/PySpark code will read from your tables and views in BigQuery, and save its final result back to BigQuery.
```

**Additional setup:**
- Create or use an existing [Cloud Storage bucket](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/creating-buckets)

> - Create or use an existing [Dataproc cluster](https://cloud.google.com/dataproc/docs/guides/create-cluster), with the [Spark BigQuery connector initialization action](https://github.com/GoogleCloudDataproc/initialization-actions/tree/master/connectors#bigquery-connectors). (Google recommends copying the action into your own Cloud Storage bucket, rather than using the example version shown in the screenshot below.)

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- Create or use an existing [Dataproc cluster](https://cloud.google.com/dataproc/docs/guides/create-cluster) with the [Spark BigQuery connector initialization action](https://github.com/GoogleCloudDataproc/initialization-actions/tree/master/connectors#bigquery-connectors). (Google recommends copying the action into your own Cloud Storage bucket, rather than using the example version shown in the screenshot below.)
```

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/building-a-dbt-project/building-models/python-models/dataproc-connector-initialization.png" title="Add the Spark BigQuery connector as an initialization action"/>

Add these attributes to your [BigQuery profile](bigquery-profile):
- `gcs_bucket`: Storage bucket to which dbt will submit PySpark code, and the Dataproc cluster will stream back execution logs.
- `dataproc_cluster_name`: Name of Dataproc cluster to use for running Python model (executing PySpark job)
- `dataproc_region`: GCP region of that Dataproc cluster (e.g. `us-central1`)

> The user or service account running dbt needs the following permissions, in addition to those needed for BigQuery ([docs](https://cloud.google.com/dataproc/docs/concepts/iam/iam)):

Reviewer 6: saying that all users need to permisssions makes the work clearer than if it's just for a single user...
```suggestion
Any user or service account that will run dbt projects that include `.py` files will need the following permissions in addition to those needed for BigQuery
```

> - dataproc.clusters.use
> - dataproc.jobs.create
> - dataproc.jobs.get
> - dataproc.operations.get
> - storage.buckets.get
> - storage.objects.create
> - storage.objects.delete

Reviewer 6: @dataders are you trying to enfore monospace API permissions?!? do you think this is a game for children!?!
```suggestion
- `dataproc.clusters.use`
- `dataproc.jobs.create`
- `dataproc.jobs.get`
- `dataproc.operations.get`
- `storage.buckets.get`
- `storage.objects.create`
- `storage.objects.delete`
```

Author: just going to put the whole darn thing in backticks!
